readme.md, before:

# Using Cursor-Claude for Uncle Block Simulations

Code generated using Claude .. even the MIT license was suggested by Claude :-)

The idea is to study orphaned or uncle block production in PoW chains like bitcoin or rootstock.

For every block height, what we observe is lowest draw from several exponential disrtibutions, one
for each miner (mining pool). Their individual rates $\lambda_{i}$ are unknown and unobservable. However, the *minimum* of exponentials is also an exponential with the effective rate parameter $ \lambda = \sum_{i} \lambda_{i}$

Thus, for a given difficulty, and assuming constant hashpower in the near term, what we observe is the lowest order statistic for each block height and these are random draws from $~expo(\lambda)$

In bitcoin an orphaned block is typically discarded. But in Rootstock (and in the initial PoW version of Ethereum), they are not thrown away. Instead, main chain blocks can point to "uncle" (or "ommer") blocks.
These chains actually reward miners for uncles too.

One way to think about the process is to think that an uncle block is one that was mined very close in time to the winning block at height H1. The uncle block shows up in the network before the next main block is finalized. So the winning block at heigh H2 can include a pointer to the uncle.

* Suppose the two lowest block times at height $H1$ are $b_{iH1} < b_{jH1}$ by some miners $i,j$. 
* Further suppose the lowest block time at height $H2$ is $b_{kH2}$ from some miner $k$
* We have $b_{iH1} < b_{jH1}$ which makes miner $j$'s block a "potential" uncle 
* but also $b_{jH1} < b_{iH1} + b_{kH2}$ so it can be actually pointed to by miner $k$

These distributions help compare and visualize the two processes: the order statistic at a given block height and the time taken by the network to mine two blocks (not uncles). In order to describe the process for uncles, we need to compute the joint distribution - which is left for later.

## Second attempt
See the git commit history for 1st attempt with a flaw (explained below)

Prompt to modify the code:
"lets modify the code. for the second *smallest* value, instead of taking 3 samples, let us draw samples from 5 different exponential distrbutions such that the sum of their rate parameters equals 1. then we compare the second *smallest* from each of these 5 draws to the other function we already have which is the sum of two iid exponentials of rate 1"

In this attempt we also add the smallest draw from the heteregenous distributions


## First attempt (logical flaw)
One way (NOT ENTIRELY CORRECT) to think about this. Compare the probability that the 2nd lowest draw from an exponential is less than a random draw from a distribution of the sum of two iid exponentials, which is a Gamma / Erlang distribution. This can be extended for the 3rd order statistic to include 2 uncles and so on.

This is not correct, because while the lowest draw from several exponentials does follow an exponential, the second lowest draw is NOT the same as drawing again from the same $expo(\lambda)$! That, in turn will depend on the number of mining pools and their hashrates. This is a good example of learning from the AI... I noticed the error when it used a sample of 3 for the first distribution (I messed up).

One way to fix this is to assume a specific number of mining pools and their relative hashrates to determined their individual rates $\lambda_{i}$'s. Then draw random samples (one from each) in eveyr round and compare the 2nd highest value with that of the sum of exponentials. Otherwise, since $1/\lambda < 1/\lambda_{i}, \forall i$ we are giving too much of an advantage to the first process. 


## Simulation
Warning: initial instruction was incorrect! I used second largest instead of smallest. Fixed in next iteration along with the logical error.

**Initial prompt to claude 3.5 sonnet:** "use python to generate simulations to compare draws from two  distributions both derived from exponential distribution of rate lamda. the first process is the value of the second largest random draw from the exponential. the second is the sum of two random draws from the exponential"

Uses numpy etc

```
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Sample results
```
Summary Statistics:

Smallest of 5 Heterogeneous Exponentials:
Mean: 0.9940
Variance: 0.9957
Median: 0.6891

Second Smallest of 5 Heterogeneous Exponentials:
Mean: 2.2873
Variance: 2.6874
Median: 1.9029

Sum of Two Exponentials (rate=1):
Mean: 1.9970
Variance: 1.9795
Median: 1.6782

Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests:
Smallest vs Sum of Two:
KS statistic: 0.3724
p-value: 0.0000

Second Smallest vs Sum of Two:
KS statistic: 0.0710
p-value: 0.0000
```

Commit message:

add 2nd order stat (exact)

readme.md, after:

# Uncle Block Simulations

Code generated using Claude and chatGPT as well .. even the MIT license was suggested by Claude (and chatGPT too) :-)

The idea is to study orphaned or uncle block production in PoW chains like bitcoin or rootstock.

For every block height, what we observe is lowest draw from several exponential disrtibutions, one
for each miner (mining pool). Their individual rates $\lambda_{i}$ are unknown and unobservable. However, the *minimum* of exponentials is also an exponential with the effective rate parameter $ \lambda = \sum_{i} \lambda_{i}$

Thus, for a given difficulty, and assuming constant hashpower in the near term, what we observe is the lowest order statistic for each block height and these are random draws from $~expo(\lambda)$

In bitcoin an orphaned block is typically discarded. But in Rootstock (and in the initial PoW version of Ethereum), they are not thrown away. Instead, main chain blocks can point to "uncle" (or "ommer") blocks.
These chains actually reward miners for uncles too.

One way to think about the process is to think that an uncle block is one that was mined very close in time to the winning block at height H1. The uncle block shows up in the network before the next main block is finalized. So the winning block at heigh H2 can include a pointer to the uncle.

* Suppose the two lowest block times at height $H1$ are $b_{iH1} < b_{jH1}$ by some miners $i,j$. 
* Further suppose the lowest block time at height $H2$ is $b_{kH2}$ from some miner $k$
* We have $b_{iH1} < b_{jH1}$ which makes miner $j$'s block a "potential" uncle 
* but also $b_{jH1} < b_{iH1} + b_{kH2}$ so it can be actually pointed to by miner $k$

### Partial distributions
Note: In what follows, we compute and plot the distributions for each case, but we do not compute the
joint distrbution, which would explain the uncle generation process more fully.

These distributions help compare and visualize the two processes: the order statistic at a given block height and the time taken by the network to mine two blocks (not uncles). In order to describe the process for uncles, we need to compute the joint distribution - which is left for later.

Using chatGPT 40, the expression for the PDF of second order statistic $X_{(2)}$ does not have a closed form expession in well-known distributions. It is a weighted su of exponetials. The expression (NOT verified by myself) is

$$
f_{X_{(2)}}(x) = \sum_{\substack{i, j = 1 \\ i \ne j}}^n 
\lambda_i \frac{\lambda_j}{\lambda_j - \lambda_i}
e^{-\lambda_i x} 
\prod_{\substack{k=1 \\ k \ne i, j}}^n e^{-\lambda_k x}, \quad x \geq 0
$$



## Second attempt
See the git commit history for 1st attempt with a flaw (explained below)

Prompt to modify the code:
"lets modify the code. for the second *smallest* value, instead of taking 3 samples, let us draw samples from 5 different exponential distrbutions such that the sum of their rate parameters equals 1. then we compare the second *smallest* from each of these 5 draws to the other function we already have which is the sum of two iid exponentials of rate 1"

In this attempt we also add the smallest draw from the heteregenous distributions


## First attempt (logical flaw)
One way (NOT ENTIRELY CORRECT) to think about this. Compare the probability that the 2nd lowest draw from an exponential is less than a random draw from a distribution of the sum of two iid exponentials, which is a Gamma / Erlang distribution. This can be extended for the 3rd order statistic to include 2 uncles and so on.

This is not correct, because while the lowest draw from several exponentials does follow an exponential, the second lowest draw is NOT the same as drawing again from the same $expo(\lambda)$! That, in turn will depend on the number of mining pools and their hashrates. This is a good example of learning from the AI... I noticed the error when it used a sample of 3 for the first distribution (I messed up).

One way to fix this is to assume a specific number of mining pools and their relative hashrates to determined their individual rates $\lambda_{i}$'s. Then draw random samples (one from each) in eveyr round and compare the 2nd highest value with that of the sum of exponentials. Otherwise, since $1/\lambda < 1/\lambda_{i}, \forall i$ we are giving too much of an advantage to the first process. 


## Simulation
Warning: initial instruction was incorrect! I used second largest instead of smallest. Fixed in next iteration along with the logical error.

**Initial prompt to claude 3.5 sonnet:** "use python to generate simulations to compare draws from two  distributions both derived from exponential distribution of rate lamda. the first process is the value of the second largest random draw from the exponential. the second is the sum of two random draws from the exponential"

Uses numpy etc

```
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Sample results
```
Summary Statistics:

Smallest of 5 Heterogeneous Exponentials:
Mean: 0.9940
Variance: 0.9957
Median: 0.6891

Second Smallest of 5 Heterogeneous Exponentials:
Mean: 2.2873
Variance: 2.6874
Median: 1.9029

Sum of Two Exponentials (rate=1):
Mean: 1.9970
Variance: 1.9795
Median: 1.6782

Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests:
Smallest vs Sum of Two:
KS statistic: 0.3724
p-value: 0.0000

Second Smallest vs Sum of Two:
KS statistic: 0.0710
p-value: 0.0000
```
